---
layout: post
title: "Curious case of Jekyll and GitHub"
update: 2019-11-22
categories: article tech
excerpt: An introduction to Jekyll for GitHub Pages 
---

> **Notes on Jekyll 4.0**
>
> Today, I went through my instructions here and I got some problems due to new Jekyll 4.0.0 version. 
> After some searches, I found following notes to solve the problem: 
> - It seems that the current `github-pages` is not compatible with Jekyll 4.0.0. So in the [section](#installation-ubuntudebian), 
> I mentioned the version of `jekyll` and `bundle` explicitly.
> - After calling `bundle install`, I got a weired error for `nokogiri` gem. Due to [link](https://github.com/sergiokopplin/indigo/issues/81),
> I installed `zlib1g-dev` package in my Debian box, so the error is resolved.

## Creating a Simple Blog Site
What you need:
- A GitHub account
  - A repository with the name of `<USERNAME>.github.io`
  - A pushed project of `Jekyll`
- A DNS name for your blog (Optional): [More Info](https://help.github.com/articles/using-a-custom-domain-with-github-pages)


## Installation (Ubuntu/Debian)
The main installation guide: [Jekyll Site](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/installation)
```sh
sudo apt install ruby ruby-dev build-essential zlib1g-dev
```

```sh
echo 'export GEM_HOME=$HOME/App/Gems' >> ~/.bashrc
echo 'export PATH=$GEM_HOME/bin:$PATH' >> ~/.bashrc
source ~/.bashrc
gem install jekyll -v '3.8.2'    # - Installing jekyll via Ruby Gems
gem install bundler -v '1.16.2'  # - Installing bundler via Ruby Gems
jekyll -v                        # - My Version: 3.8.2
jekyll new myblog                # - Create a project based on Minema template
cd myblog
bundle exec jekyll serve         # - Build & Execute a local web server 
```
The last command starts a local webserver with address [http://127.0.0.1:4000](http://127.0.0.1:4000) to review the blog.
To stop it, just press `ctrl+c`.

The contents in folder `myblog` are:
- _posts/
- _config.yml
- .gitignore
- 404.html
- about.md
- Gemfile
- Gemfile.lock
- index.md

### On Ruby Update

There are times when you update your system and ruby packages, and your gems won't work anymore. In that case
execute following commands in root of your project to reinstall your required gems:

```sh
gem install bundler -v '1.16.2'
bundler install
``` 


## Configuration

### Enable Github Pages
- Modify `Gemfile` to enable `github-pages` (instructions included in the file)
- Execute `bundle update`
- If you encounter version incompatibility with Jekyll 4 or about `nokogiri`, refer to [link](#notes-on-jekyll-40)

### Preferred Setting
File `_config.yml` is the configuration of the site based on YAML format (mostly `key: value` pairs).
Preferred altered config entries are:

```yml
title: <SITE TITLE>
email: <EMAIL>
description: <DESCRIPTION>
author: <DEFAULT_SITE_AUTHOR>

url: "<DNS_URL_NAME or <USERNAME>.github.io>"
permalink: /:categories/:title
show_excerpts: true

github_username: <G_USERNAME>
twitter_username: <T_USERNAME>
linkedin_username: <L_USERNAME>

markdown: kramdown
kramdown:
  syntax_highlighter_opts:
    block:
      line_numbers: true
theme: minima
plugins:
  - jekyll-feed

defaults:
  -
    scope:
      path: ""
      type: posts
    values:
      author: <DEFAULT_BLOG_ENTRIES_AUTHOR>
```
**Note**: Lines from 15 to 18 is set to show line numbers generally in all code blocks.

### Style Customization
Since showing line numbers is set in the `_config.yml`, the rendered result is not well and needs to be altered.
So the main style of site must be modified.
To handle this issue, the file `<PRJ_DIR>/assets/main.scss` must be created with following content:
```scss
---
# Only the main Sass file needs front matter (the dashes are enough)
---

$content-width: 1000px !default;

@import "minima";

.highlight {
  table {
    border: 0;
    margin: 0;

    th, td {
      padding: 0;
      border: 0;
    }
  }

  pre, code {
    border: 0;
    margin: 0;
    font-size: 14px;
  }
}
```
- The `highlight` css class here overrides the default definition in minima theme. 
- Line 5 set the content width to 1000px. The variable is defined in file `minima.scss` 
  in minima's GEM directory (`$GEM_HOME/gems/minima-2.4.1/_sass/minima.scss`)

### Create a Post
- Must create a file in the `_posts` directory with name of pattern: `<YEAR>-<MONTH>-<DAY>-<NAME>.md`
- Must starts the file with following content at top (called [Front Matter](#front-matter)):
```yml
---
layout: post
title: "<TITLE>"
categories: <CAT1> [, <CAT2>, ...]
excerpt: <EXCERPT> 
---
```
- Now continute the content based on [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org) format

### Create a Page
- A page is a link that is shown at the top header of your blog (menu bar)
- By default, an `about.md` page is created
- To add a page, just create a `<NAME>.md` file in the root of your project with following content at top
(called [Front Matter](#front-matter)):
```yml
---
layout: page
title: "<TITLE>"
permalink: /<LINK>/
---
```
- Now continue the content based on [Markdown](https://www.markdownguide.org) format

**Note**: In my case, I created a `pages` directory in the root of the project, and I saved all my pages in it, even `about.md`. 
Jekyll automatically finds all the pages in all normal directory (not started with `_`) and generates them in the root of your blog.


## Basics
- After building the site, `_site/` is created.
- All regular files are copied to `_site/`, unless it starts with `_`.
- After `Gemfile` modification, execute `bundle update`
- For GitHub Pages Gem (set in `Gemfile`), execute `apt install zlib1g-dev` by root user
- The default theme is `minema`
- Execute `bundle show minima` in project root directory: it shows the home directory of theme gem `minima` (i.e. `$GEM_HOME/gems/minima-2.4.1`).
In spite of older version, the following directories are in theme home directory:
  - `_includes/`
  - `_layouts/`
  - `_sass/`
  
  **Note**: you can copy any above directory to the site to change the default generation behavior.


### Front Matter
- The content between two `---` at the above of an `.md` file.
- It is in JSON or YAML format, each row is a `key: value` pair. In fact, they are **meta-data** for a post!

#### Post
- Except the `layout`, other keys are optional!
```
---
layout: post
title: "<TITLE>"
date: <YEAR>-<MONTH>-<DAY> <HOUR>:<MINUTE>:<SECOND> <TIME_ZONE>
categories: <CAT1> [, <CAT2>, ...]
excerpt: <EXCERPT>
---
```

#### Page
- Except the `layout` and `title`, other keys are optional!
```
---
layout: page
title: "<TITLE>"
permalink: /<LINK>/
---
```

### Creating Drafts
Drafts are posts which has not been published yet. So they must be in another directory. Jekyll has a standard for it,
and you can create `_drafts` in your repository's root and put your drafts in it.

**Note**: To preview your drafts in your local environment, you can execute Jekyll by `bundle exec jekyll serve --drafts`.
